[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm William Henry and
this is "Ascension Keepers."
One of the most profound,
if not the most profound,
of the numerous post-ascension
appearances of the risen Jesus
occurred in Assisi, Italy
in the 13th century.
When he appeared to the man
we now call Saint Francis.
And who is known as the founder
of the Franciscan Order.
Dante, Giotto, Michelangelo
are Franciscans.
A son was born into the world.
With these words in
The Divine Comedy,
Dante alludes to Francis' birth.
His contemporaries viewed
him in messianic terms.
Thinking that he blazed a trail
of light for our ascension.
Born Giovanni di Piertro
di Bernardone, Francis
was raised in
wealth and privilege
by a father who
was a cloth trader.
He awoke from the dream
of his upbringing.
And like Jacob, traded
his rich clothes
and began the quest
for the right clothes
to scale the ladder to heaven.
He was known as the
gentle saint who
spoke with birds,
tamed wolves, and who
turned Europe upside down.
Pope Benedict called him
a giant among holy men.
His life arc took him from a
life of wealth and privilege
to self-chosen material poverty.
And on to the highest
spiritual heights.
Francis became known as Jesus'
brother and the second Christ
to his followers.
One reason why is
because it is claimed
that he lived the Sermon on the
Mount better than anyone else.
The Sermon on the Mount is the
most famous sermon Jesus gave
and his most esoteric.
In it, he delivers the
Beatitudes or eight ascending
steps towards attaining the
blessedness of a divine life.
The eight Beatitudes as
recorded in Matthew are,
blessed are those who mourn,
for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the land.
Blessed are they who hunger
and thirst for righteousness,
for they will be satisfied.
Blessed are the merciful,
for they will be shown mercy.
Blessed are the pure of
heart, for they will see God.
Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they will
be called the children of God.
And blessed are they
who were persecuted
for the sake of
righteousness, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.
The Beatitudes describe
the qualities of perfection
that all who seek
ascension should embody.
The thing is scholars now
know the Beatitudes found
in this sermon were
derived from these scenes.
Scroll 4Q525 reads, "Blessed
is with a pure heart
and does not slander
with his tongue--
blessed are those,
who hold to her,
or wisdoms precepts do not
hold to the ways of iniquity.
Blessed are those,
who rejoice in her
and do not burst forth
in ways of folly.
Blessed are those, who
seek her with pure hands
and do not pursue her
with a treacherous heart.
Blessed is a man, who
has attained wisdom
and walks in the law
of the most high."
The words of Jesus'
Beatitudes are attributed
to those of the Teacher
of Righteousness,
the founder of the Essenes,
who they recognized
as their long-awaited messiah.
And as the "Dead Sea Scrolls"
were written before the New
Testament, Jesus is clearly
quoting this Essene messiah.
This was the figure
the Essenes referred to
as the high celestial
being they were calling in.
The content of the
Beatitudes can also
be found in the credo
or credo of the Essenes.
Interestingly,
scholars understand
the sermon for both Jesus'
original speaking and Matthew's
writing is designed as an oral,
memorizable meditation device.
By repeating it over
and over and over,
we anchor the ascension
energies of this teaching
and begin to tune
into our future self
that lives the Beatitudes.
As one who climbed the
mountain of ascension
by living the sermon
better than others,
we may say that
Francis of Assisi
lived the Essene way better than
anyone else during his time,
or maybe even since the Essenes.
That is a very powerful and
underacknowledged statement
about Francis.
We should also not be surprised
to learn that Saint Francis was
known as God's troubadour.
It is certain that he knew about
the Cathars and the Troubadours
through either of them or
through the Troubadours
he encountered as a
young man in Assisi
or while he was a prisoner
for a year in Peruggia.
The Troubadours
were Cathars, who
were on the path of ascension.
And Francis, it
is well known, was
a great lover of
French Troubadour songs
and traditions.
Though he lived and taught
within the Catholic church,
elements of Cathar and
Troubador spirituality
can be seen in his
own radiant ministry--
his love of nature, particularly
the sun and the moon,
his vision of a divine
woman, and his relationship
with Saint Clair,
which was very much
in the tradition of the chaste
lover-beloved relationship
of the Troubadours.
Connecting Francis
with the Troubadours
gives us a lot of room to
superimpose a Cathar lens
on his story.
However, the recorded
story of his life,
the history of his
life is explicit enough
in telling us that Francis'
extraordinary spiritual
experiences matched those, which
were the goal of the Essenes.
He not only lived a life
based on the Beatitudes, which
were based on Essene teaching.
But he also had an
encounter with a Seraphim,
the same angels the Essenes
claimed to be living with.
In fact, Francis' title,
the second Christ,
was bequeathed upon him by
a contemporary biographer
after he became the
first person to receive
the stigmata, the five wounds
of the crucified Christ.
This happened through a
profound mystical encounter
with an apparition of
Jesus, who appeared
to Francis as a seraph angel.
During this encounter, Jesus
beamed five rays of light
into Francis' flesh, one
for each of the five wounds
Jesus endured during
the crucifixion.
Adding to the
intrigue of this event
is the fact that
the Franciscans have
been named as the protectors
of the Arma Christi,
or the artifacts of Jesus.
To me, Jan van Eyck's
version of the stigmatization
of St. Francis, which
we're looking at here,
is perhaps the most stunning.
As we have discussed,
the seraphim
exist in the exact same state
of being as the resurrected
Christ.
They are light beings.
The Seraph Jesus is strikingly
similar to this fourth
or possibly 10th century
Egyptian Christian image
from the Nubian Museum
in Aswan, Egypt.
Whether it's from the
4th or 10th century,
it doesn't matter.
This is evidence that
some early Christians,
before the time of Francis of
Assisi in the 13th century,
saw the risen Jesus as a Seraph.
So why not Francis?
We will return to Francis
of Assisi's encounter
with Jesus as a
Seraph in a moment.
For now, we will note that
this encounter didn't just
happen spontaneously.
No, Francis spent his entire
adult life preparing for it.
Here's the back story
to this encounter.
The year is 1205.
And the air of France
in northern Italy,
where Francis lives, is thick
with the ascension teachings
of Jewish and Sufi
mysticism that
focuses on attaining
the light body
and ascending to
the throne of God.
The Cathar heresy
is on the rise.
And Francis is deeply
affected by it.
Preaching from their lofty
monasteries in southern France,
the Cathars lived by
the vision of Isaiah,
which describes Isaiah's
vision of a stairway to heaven
and his encounter with a Seraph.
Isaiah is seen encountering
a Seraph in this vision.
One could make the
argument that Francis
followed the path of Isaiah.
And it led him to this
same ultimate experience,
the encounter with the
Seraph, in this case,
Jesus as a Seraph.
Life is a training ground
for this experience
and the ascension that is
required in order to partake
in it or so the Cathars taught.
They claimed to possess
the secret asenscion
teachings of Jesus.
They are violently opposed
by the Church of Rome
and Pope Innocent III, who
seeks to eliminate the Cathar
heresy in France and its
so-called ascension secrets.
At that time, the
church knew it needed
an infusion of new spirit,
to put it politely.
Little did Innocent III know,
but a second ascension front
was about to open in his own
backyard in Italy in Assisi.
The person opening
the door was Francis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Assisi has a pure
spiritual essence
that is palpable to visitors.
It is a truly holy place.
And one wonders if the place
possessed this Holy Spirit
before Francis arrived or
if maybe he left it there
for us to imbibe and to enjoy.
As I said, Francis was
raised by wealthy parents.
And it's fair to
say that he lived
the life of an Italian prince.
But in 1202, he left
his life of luxury
to march off to battle
against the city of Peruggia,
seeking military glory like
most young men would do.
He was taken prisoner
during the battle.
And when he finally
went home a year later,
he spent another
year convalescing.
During this time, Francis
began to experience
dreams and visions.
His journey up the
ladder to heaven
took a dramatic turn
when he found himself
alone in the Church of
St. Damian near Assisi.
He looks up at the
painted crucifix.
The face is compassionate,
radiating hope.
The hair has triple
locks, like three rays.
Above his crown is a
portrayal of the ascension,
Christ emerging from a red
circle, an orb of light holding
a golden cross, his rod.
He is greeted by
other perfected ones.
In a vision, the image of Christ
in the crucifix miraculously
begins to speak to Francis,
saying, go repair my church,
which you see has fallen
completely in ruin.
Now art, especially sacred
art, has extraordinary, even
supernatural power.
And the idea that a piece of
art, in this case, a painted
crucifix, could
transmit a holy message
or a sacred spiritual energy,
in this case, to Francis,
is the core idea of what
is known as Arcanum,
the sacred art of ascension.
Francis may or may know
about this ability of art
to speak to us.
But he thinks he is
charged with rebuilding
the dilapidated
church at St. Damien.
But he soon realizes it is the
Catholic church that Francis
is charged with rebuilding.
This puts him on a collision
course with Pope Innocent III.
And strangely or perhaps not,
in 1207, Pope Innocent III
himself had a dream.
In it, he saw the Basilica of
Saint John Lateran, the mother
of all churches in
Rome, collapsing
and one small and
insignificant religious brother
supporting the church
on his shoulders
to prevent it from falling.
Two years later, Francis of
Assisi would come calling.
When Francis finally meets
Innocent III in 1209,
it had to have been an
extraordinary meeting.
But Pope Innocent
III agrees to work
not in opposition to
Francis, but in communion
with him, the
power of his dream.
Francis is allowed to
open the Franciscan order.
And after his encounter
with the talking crucifix,
Francis began selling his
personal and family possessions
in order to repair the church.
When his father learned
of this, he was furious.
He dragged Francis
before a local bishop
to force his son into stopping
this bizarre behavior.
Francis responded by
taking off his clothes
and swearing his devotion to
the father, who art in heaven
rather than his Earthly father.
He walked out of the
cathedral to become a hermit.
The talking crucifix
episode is just
the beginning of Francis'
mystical encounter with Christ.
In 1208, now in his
mid 20s, Francis
hears mass on the
feast of Saint Matthew
and is impressed by
Jesus's instruction
given in this gospel.
Take no gold nor silver
nor money in your belt,
no bag for your journey,
not two tunics, no sandals,
nor a staff.
Francis had his first
glimpse of his future.
He had his first vision.
And for him, the road to
heaven is paved with poverty.
Later in the book of
Matthew, Jesus directly
references human
perfection when he
tells a rich man,
who had asked Jesus
what he needed to do in
order to attain eternal life.
Jesus replies, if you want to
be perfect, meaning whole, holy,
and complete, go and
sell what you've got.
Give it to the poor.
And thou shall have treasure in
heaven and come and follow me.
Jesus is talking about following
him to the heavenly realm.
And our stuff isn't
coming with us.
Jesus then says to his
disciples, I say to you,
it's easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to
enter the Kingdom of God.
And when the
disciples heard this,
they were astonished and
said, then, who can be saved?
When we see Jesus in a
rainbow-colored mandorla,
the gate or eye of heaven,
this is the eye of the needle
that he's referring to.
And in Christian tradition,
it's the Seraphim,
who guard the eye of the
needle-shaped mandorla,
or gateway to heaven.
In Christian art, the
gateways to heaven
resemble what modern
science calls wormholes,
theoretical tunnel-like
constructs that connect
two distant regions in space.
These cosmic shortcuts
can take us from point A
to point B as if there
is nothing in between.
Several papers, one published
by two noted physicists, Leonard
Susskind and Juan Maldacena,
posit that tiny wormholes
act as umbilical cords
to entangled particles,
allowing them to exchange data
at faster than light speeds.
So what they're
saying is wormholes
are umbilical
cords, which thread
their way through the cosmos.
The cord and the thread
are the same thing.
The message Francis
heard was that in order
to thread the needle,
open the wormhole
and go through the eye of the
needle to the heavenly realm,
we will have to travel
lightly and give up everything
we know of Earth life.
The additional
message here, again,
is that our stuff, including
emotional and physical
is clearly not going with us.
And in fact, it is
what is in front of us
perhaps in our ascension.
What is preventing
us from picking up
the needle and thread and
sowing our cloak of many colors
or our garment of light
is this emotional stuff.
Combined, these
statements tell us
that in order to enter
the heavenly realm,
a transformation is required.
We must perfect
or raise ourselves
to the level of
consciousness of Christ
or Christ consciousness
and the perfected ones.
As the saying goes,
behind every great man
is an even greater woman.
In Jesus' life, it
was Mary Magdalene.
And Padmasambhava's life,
it was Yeshe Tsogyal,
his female disciple.
In Francis' life,
this was Clare.
The luminous one,
Saint Clare of Assisi
was also born into a
wealthy Italian family,
but soon also shunned
her luxurious upbringing
to embrace the life of
piety and enlightenment.
When Clare was 18,
Francis of Assisi
came to preach in the Church
of Saint Giorgio at Assisi.
Inspired by his words, Clare
asked Francis to help her
in dedicating her life to God.
And he vowed to do so.
The following year,
Clare's parents
chose a wealthy young
man for Clare to marry.
But she pointedly
refused, fleeing soon
after to the Porziuncola Chapel,
where Francis received her.
She took vows dedicating
her life to God.
And that moment occurring
on March 20, 1212
marked the beginning of the
Second Order of Saint Francis.
The group became known for their
austere and devout lifestyle
and for their power
of their prayer, which
is credited with saving
Assisi from invaders twice.
Stories tell how
Francis and Clare
would retire to the
woods near Assisi
to converse with each other.
The villagers of Assisi, seeing
a red glow over the forests,
ran with buckets
of water to douse
what they assumed was a fire.
Instead, they found
Francis and Clare
seated in a clearing,
wrapped in conversation
surrounded by a holy fire.
So now, let's return
to the story of how
Francis received the Stigmata.
Saint Bonaventure, in his
"LIfe of Saint Francis,"
describes Francis as being
more inflamed than usual
with the love of God as
he began a special time
of solitary prayer at La
Verna in September of 1224.
His unquenchable fire of
love for the good Jesus,
Bonaventure writes, was fanned
into such a blaze of flames
that many waters could not
quench so powerful a love.
Bonaventure goes on.
While Francis was praying
on the mountainside,
he saw a Seraph with six
fiery and shiny wings descend
from the height of heaven.
And when, in swift
flight, the Seraph
had reached a spot in the
air near the man of God,
there appeared between
the wings the figure
of a man crucified
with his hands
and feet extended in
the form of a cross
and fastened to a cross.
Two of the wings were
lifted above his head.
Two were extended for flight.
And two covered his whole body.
While Francis saw this,
he was overwhelmed.
And his heart was flooded with
a mixture of joy and sorrow.
He rejoiced because
of the gracious way
Christ looked upon him under
the appearance of a Seraph.
But the fact that he
was fastened to a cross
pierced his soul with the
sword of compassionate sorrow.
It is said that whoever
lays eyes on a Seraph,
he would be
instantly incinerated
due to the immense
brightness of the Seraph.
That may be true for some.
For others, especially the
awakened, contact with a Seraph
results not in
incineration but rather
transference of a divine
energy and transformation
into a Seraph.
This is what
Francis experienced.
In fact, Renaissance thinkers,
taking up Francis' mantle
believed humans can transform
into Seraphim by meditating
on the love of the Creator.
In fact, that is our
highest human aspiration.
In a moment of what scholars
call seraphic ecstasy,
Francis, who had sought to
imitate Christ in all things
actually received the marks
of crucifixion on his body.
As Saint Bonaventure
acknowledges and lends supports
for, writing in his book "The
Major Legend of Saint Francis,"
through the Stigmata,
the true love of Christ
transformed the
lover into his image.
When the vision
disappeared, writes
Bonaventure, Francis was
left with a marvelous
ardor in his heart--
a new frequency,
a new vibration.
And at the same time, there were
imprinted on his body markings
that were no less marvelous.
These markings
were the Stigmata.
And after receiving
the Stigmata,
Francis became known
by his contemporaries
as the second Christ.
One needs to analyze
their own heart
and what happens to their
heart when they truly
love something or someone
to comprehend the statement.
The true love of Christ
transformed the lover
into his image.
One can only presume
to imagine the ecstasy
a holy man like Francis must
have felt, where he touched
by the full spectrum rainbow
light body or Resurrection
body of Jesus.
It makes no difference whether
he imagined the experience,
hallucinated it, or
physically experienced it.
An exchange of
energy took place.
A transformation occurred as
a result. That's what counts.
In Bartholomew
Carducci's visualization,
Francis is lifted off the ground
in a shaft or pillar of light,
emanating from an opening in
the heavens in which Christ
as a fiery Seraph hovers.
This gives new meaning to
the term, beam me up, Scotty.
For some, accepting this
story requires too big
a leap of the imagination.
Some church authorities
have not recognized
Saint Francis' Stigmata
as divine intervention.
Pope Benedict XIV in the 18th
century said he was doubtful.
Saint Francis de Sales in
the 16th century at first
believed the marks were the
result of heavenly action
but later came to judge them as
a product of strong compassion
in a person's thinking
about Jesus' suffering.
Pope Pius in the 19th century,
like many of his predecessors,
believed that Saint' Francis'
Stigmata were historically
certain but not an
article of faith.
The church's opinion is
that this phenomena only
occurs in ecstatics, persons
in a state of ecstasy,
reportedly a common denominator
in all Stigmata claims
of which there are many.
Ecstasy is described as an
intensely emotional state
in which rational thought
and self-control are absent.
And artists have attempted
to portray Francis swooning
in this ecstatic state.
Sassetta has Francis
gazing at the inner sky.
The front of his
altarpiece is a triptych
and depicts Saint
Francis in ecstasy.
Standing on top of
a man with a sword,
Saint Francis is
surrounded by an orb,
a portal of fiery angels.
His stance is representative
of the crucified Christ.
His face is transfigured
with ecstasy.
He glances upwards toward
the three mystical women
of poverty, chastity,
and obedience.
Below Saint Francis'
feet are three characters
that represent the worldly
pleasures he gave up
in his quest for
enlightenment and ascension.
The man in armor
that he stands upon
represents insubordination
or violence.
The fair lady
looking into a mirror
represents luxury
or sexual desires.
And the nun represents
the strong desire
for wealth, all
of which represent
his lifelong
progression from nature
to grace to glory towards the
final realization and ecstasy.
We need to know
that Francis is also
connected with an
astounding Merkabah story.
Once he traveled into
Assisi while his brethren
remained at a hut in
the outskirts of town.
Late that evening while Francis
was praying at an isolated
garden within the
town, the friars
back in the countryside
witnessed an astonishing sight.
At about midnight,
a fiery chariot
with a globe of light resting
above suddenly appeared.
This bright chariot of
fire took two or three
laps here and there
about the room,
twisting around and
about in their hut.
It rested on a large globe,
shining like the sun,
illuminating the dark night.
It's obviously similar to
the Merkabah about chariot
of Ezekiel, of Elijah, and
Jesus, who we have previously
discussed.
The friars were
amazed by not only
the light that enters the body
but also in the spirit, which
had extraordinary effects.
The brilliant light astoundingly
made their hearts and souls
completely clear to each other.
They all glanced about
and immediately developed
a wonderful understanding
that although
their spiritual father,
Francis, was physically absent,
he was miraculously present
in this dazzling apparition.
Stories like this of Francis
popping into his light body
and riding a Merkabah
chariot must have circulated
around Italy in Europe.
This would, in part, explain
why the Franciscan Order
grew so rapidly.
More, Francis' ascetic way
of life, his deep respect
for nature, and his
devotion to the poor,
reflect absolutely the
Cathar way of life.
It greatly appealed to
the people of Italy,
as tens of thousands
quickly joined Francis' way.
Francis had for them
a simple formula
for saving mankind,
the imitation of Christ
and brotherly love.
Francis went on to
transform the church
by refocusing Christians on
the gospel, not on the church.
He taught his followers to obey
the gospel, the words of Jesus
to care for the suffering, to
preach, and to embrace poverty
as their bride--
again, to embrace the
promise of the light body
rather than the promise
of Earthly pleasures.
As the Mahayana Buddhists have
the six paramitas or practices
that lead to perfection, being
generosity, morality, patience,
diligent effort,
contemplation, and insight, so,
too, did Francis have
six practices that
lead to ascension.
The first is friendship.
The second was
embracing the other.
He saw the sacred in
everyone and everything.
He advocated poverty.
He renounced wealth,
power, and control.
Being poor Francis' way meant
to reduce the effects of karma
on one's ascension.
Spirituality--
Francis showed people
how to live spiritual lives all
the time, not just in church.
Care-- Francis taught
that all of God's creation
must be cared for.
He poetically called
the sun his brother
and the moon his sister.
He is the subject of the
prayer of Saint Francis.
Lord, make me an
instrument of your peace.
And it's for this reason
that he has become
today's environmental Saint.
Death-- Francis
taught his followers
to welcome death, the promise
of the afterlife, the afterlife
in a light body.
When Francis died,
one of the brethren
saw his soul,
which was now freed
from his body winging its
way towards heaven surrounded
by a white cloud.
He said it looked like
a bright shining star.
This is a perfect description
of the Merkabah throne
or ascension throne of Christ.
After his death, Clare
continued his work
and broadened her own influence.
She died in 1253 and was
canonized two years later
by Pope Alexander IV.
Works such as Giotto's
"Apotheosis of Saint Francis"
or Vasari's "Saint
Francis in Glory"
illustrate the belief
that he ascended to heaven
and now sits on the
ascension throne.
This means that
Francis of Assisi
fulfill the ultimate mission
of the Essenes, the Cathars,
the Manichaeans and
all the other ascension
keepers we've been discussing.
Francis' story is a powerful
story of transformation.
He was an ordinary
person like you
and I, who received a
revelation, in this case,
through a work of art, followed
the path of this message,
and gradually,
step by step, began
to embrace the transformative
powers of that original message
and embraced his ascended self.
All of us might not need
to go to the extremes
that Francis took.
In his life, he made a
very powerful statement
about taking off any
of the robes of wealth.
But maybe in our
time we're meant
to use this incredible
abundance that our world has
offered to us as a stepping
stone to our own ascension.
And in this way,
Francis' message
is that no matter what
our life circumstance,
whether we come from poverty
or from great wealth, we
all can embrace the
path of ascension,
which is the way
of love, and ascend
into the celestial realms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]